Being originally from Ohio, it is no wonder that Huffman went to Ohio State University for his BS (in electrical engineering). What is unusual was his age (18) when he earned it in 1944. After serving in the United States Navy, he went back to Ohio State for an MS degree (1949) and then to MIT, for a PhD (1953, electrical engineering). That same year, Huffman joined the faculty at MIT. In 1967, he made his only career move when he went to the University of California, Santa Cruz as the founding faculty member of the Computer Science Department. During his long tenure at UCSC, Huffman played a major role in the development of the department (he served as chair from 1970 to 1973) and he is known for his motto "my products are my students." Even after his retirement, in 1994, he remained active in the department, teaching information theory and signal analysis courses. Huffman made significant contributions in several areas, mostly information theory and coding, signal designs for radar and communications, and design procedures for asynchronous logical circuits. Of special interest is the well-known Huffman algorithm for constructing a set of optimal prefix codes for data with known frequencies of occurrence. At a certain point he became interested in the mathematical properties of "zero curvature" surfaces, and developed this interest into techniques for folding paper into unusual sculptured shapes (the so-called computational origami).

Huffman coding is a popular method for data compression. Since its development in 1952 by D. Huffman, this method has been the subject of intensive research in data compression.  The long discussion in [Gilbert and Moore 59] proves that the Huffman code is a minimum-length code in the sense that no other encoding has a shorter average length.  An algebraic approach to constructing the Huffman code is introduced in [Karp 61]. In [Gallager 74], Robert Gallager shows that the redundancy of Huffman coding is at most p1 + 0.086 where p1 is the probability of the most-common symbol in the alphabet. The redundancy is the difference between the average Huffman codeword length and the entropy. Given a large alphabet, such as the set of letters, digits and punctuation marks used by a natural language, the largest symbol probability is typically around 15–20%, bringing the value of the quantity p1 + 0.086 to around 0.1. This means that Huffman codes are at most 0.1 bit longer (per symbol) than an ideal entropy encoder, such as arithmetic coding.
s
